this tank chats going to be about the
very famous Soviet tank
the t-34 we're going to look at the t-34
76 this model and also a look at a t-34
85 now this tank it's quite hard to
explain and talk about because it is
surrounded by such a history and such a
number of myths and it's become an
iconic vehicle for Soviet Russia and
that Great Patriotic War so we're going
to try and take some of those issues
apart as we look at it this particular
t-34 76 is a very early one and we're
very fortunate to have it here it was
actually captured by the Finnish forces
in the continuation war there's the
Winter War of 39 40 later on later 41 the
war begins again against the Soviet
Union and the Finns capture a number of
vehicles including this very early t-34
they put it into service themselves and
this particular vehicle it's got
modifications on it that the Finns did
and it was actually still in service as
a training vehicle into the 1950s with
the Finnish military and the swastika on
the side that by the way is a Finnish
symbol that's been used by their
military it's nothing to do with Nazism
people often wonder why that's on there
the fact they happen to be fighting on
the German sides against Soviet Russia
that's one of those coincidences but
again so this particular vehicle it's on
loan to the Tank Museum and we're very
grateful for the Finns for lending it to
us now we need to start back with what's
the Red Army up to in terms of its use
of Tanks the Red Army is first formed in
1918 and it takes a number of Czarist
officers into its formation it looks at
what the best way for the Red Army to
fight a future war is going to be and it
studies quite a number of different
developments even studies like the
Commonwealth use of combined arms at the
Battle of Amiens it looks at a whole
range of different issues and there is a
massive debate within the Soviet millet
tree hierarchy about how should we fight
a war in the future now one of the
people Mikhail Tukhachevsky is looking
at the idea of using armoured forces for
a type of warfare that at one point gets
called the warfare of annihilation let's
have the Red Army as a massive very
sophisticated technologically advanced
Force which will deliver a crushing blow
on to any enemy there's another school
of thought that argues along the lines
of saying no let's use Russia's great
country its depth
let's go along the way of a of a sort of
sense of attrition rather than
annihilation and that traditionally that
attritional warfare is how Russia's
fought wars in the past now these
debates go on 1929 Stalin comes to power
he decides he's going to back Mikhail
Tukhachevsky --zz ideas and he's going
to took a chess keys actually even
arguing to say let's industrialize the
whole of soviet society to build not
things like freezes or fridges for the
homes let's do it to build tanks
aeroplanes and make us his great
military power now Stalin knows is about
to start implementing the five-year
plans he's going to back took a Chiefs
key because he wants he likes that as an
idea and he also needs the Red Army on
his side is he's going to implement all
these future plans now in 1930 then out
go Red Army agents to buy from Britain
the Vickers export tank and from America
they buy a couple examples and a license
for the Walter Christie tank there
hasn't gone in printed production in
America but has that famous Christie
suspension on a very fast vehicle and in
Russia these vehicles the Vickers export
tank is developed into the t26 tank and
it is started to be built in huge
numbers in Russia and
with the Christie tank it becomes the BT
series of tanks again these are going to
be fast quick moving vehicles that are
going to be the equivalent of cavalry
tanks t-26 much more the infantry tanks
now those vehicles take time to build in
the factories and Russia also has a
problem of industrialization that's why
these five-year plans how do we actually
push through an industrialization
process so again from America the
Soviets bring in Alfred Karn who's an
American designer of factories and he
ends up building huge numbers of
factories and to help the Russians build
this new tank flea the famous Stalingrad
tractor factory is actually one of
Alfred Khan's
creations now that process of building
these vehicles some of them are not
built to a great standard the Russians
have a lot of trouble with their
metallurgy so some of the early tracks
are fairly weak and by 1937 they're
already looking at what might be the
replacement vehicle certainly for the BT
series of vehicles now this is when the
designer of the t-34 mikhail koshkin
comes into the picture he's working at
the car called locomotive or Comintern
locomotive Factory it's called basically
they're building tanks there and he set
the task of can he build a replacement
for the BT tank and his first model that
he comes out with is something called
the a 20
it's got sloped armor it's got a 45
millimeter gun it's gonna have
potentially a diesel engine in the back
and it's also one of these ones they
call it eight by six it's actually got
six of the road wheels are powered by
the engine as were the BT series and
that dates back to the fact that early
track technology was a bit unreliable if
you could run your vehicle on wheels on
the roads till you need the tracks that
would be better now the problem with
that it means extra technology lots of
extra come complexity to the design and
build of the vehicle and that idea is
fairly rack
he dropped in this 820 prototype 20
millimeters of frontal armor nicely
sloped but again we're looking at 1937
here 1938 with late Kazan 1939 with
counting goal lots of lessons are
learned from these battles and what
comes back is a use of the t26 and the
BT tanks such as issues such as the
world's not being very good the enemy
anti-tank guns even though they weren't
that powerful could penetrate the armor
so koshkin has a rethink and he goes
back to Stalin and the red army and said
look shouldn't we build something more
powerful thicker armor protection
all-round a better tank and perhaps even
a universal tank in other words this
could be a tank that takes over from the
BT series and also the t26 series of
Tanks let's combine them into one new
type of model now he goes away the first
prototype of his new model it goes
through another development
it's got thicker Armour on it t 40 it's
got a bit of a thicker Armour on there
in the first place they start looking at
a bigger gun they improve on that newer
model and ultimately that becomes really
the prototype of what becomes the t-34
now cocking calls it the t-34 because he
dates back to 1934 is the time his first
thinking of some of the ideas and the
theories that go into that t-34 tank
so what's he come up with he comes up
with a tank that has an seventy six
point two millimeter gunner on it's
about a three inch gun and that's big
for tanks at the time he comes up with
he's already got the idea of the sloped
armor slope tom has been around for a
while but the level of protection now is
quite considerably more that he puts on
this first model t-34 and another issue
just like the American Sherman during
the production run of t-34 the levels of
armor protection go up they almost
doubled during its production run
he gets this v12 diesel engine v2k
engine that goes in the back of this
vehicle diesel engine aluminium block
the designer of that engine ends up in
1938 guy killed kalpen ends up being
shot in one of Russia's or Stalin's
purges it's got a transmission system
that is at the beginning fairly rough
and ready but again through the process
of manufacture starts improving and this
first prototype is sent out on the road
for a 2000 kilometer road trip they go
from Kharkov they visit Moscow they show
the vehicle off to the Kremlin to Stalin
and it's taken around the houses and
again obviously in that sort of early
driving sudden transmission teething
troubles come out further changes are
being made now there's an onus now on
the development of this tank because
already even though there's been
doubters about do we want to go this big
heavy it's about a 28 ton vehicle do we
want that amount of firepower you've got
the people building the kV 1 kV 2 tanks
they're looking at as if to say hang on
a second this has a rival for us we
don't like the idea there's people in
the Red Army are saying no it would be
much more sensible for the Soviet
economy to perfect and keep on building
the BT and the t26 tear it series of
vehicles but what's happening is the
Winter War 39 to 40 shows again as did
Cal King goal and late Kazan battles at
the end of the 30s the weakness of those
designs and of course in May of 1940
with the German invasion of France
blitzkrieg we see then or the Russian
see the use of new armor and the way
that the Germans are using vehicles like
the pans r3 and the pans are for so now
all of a sudden that t-34 there's an
emphasis behind it and by September of
1940 the very first production vehicles
are now starting to come out koshkin the
designer he dies of pneumonia in
September when they
first vehicles are being issued and his
role as a developer of the t-34 is then
taken over by the chap who's been
building the transmission so he ends up
looking after the development of the
t-34 through into the t-34 85 now that
t-34 tank the early models again like so
many tanks they have a number of
failures I've already mentioned
metallurgy that consistently becomes a
problem for the Russians transmissions
there's photographs of some of the early
t-34 is driving around with a spare
transmission literally bolted to the
rear of the vehicle because there was so
many failures so you took a spare one
with you they have a number of problems
there with that vehicle and there's only
about 900 them are in service by the
summer of 1941 when of course
here comes Operation Barbarossa and the
in Germans invade the Soviet Union
there's about 500 kv-1 tanks ready at
about that time the vast majority of
this enormous Soviet tank fleet at the
time is still bTW tanks or the t26
series of Tanks in huge tens of
thousands of numbers now the Red Army
that meets that German invasion in the
summer of 1941 has gone through in the
late 1930s a series of purges from
Stalin
he's got rid of at least 35,000 officers
it's getting new equipment that's
starting to come into service it is
expanded massively and rapidly with this
threat of a German war on the horizon
originally it was being built up much
more along the lines of traditional le
Reaver was going to be there Poland then
all of a sudden Stalin has got his
Molotov Ribbentrop pact he's done a pact
with histor Hitler some say that's to
bite him more time some say was just
naivety he's got an extra year or so but
that Russian army is described as a
stumbling Colossus it is not in a very
fit state to fight the war that it's
coming its way even though it's got some
of these new vehicles coming into
service now this tank
the t-34 76
again we hear great stories about it in
terms of when the Germans first
encounter it they're absolutely amazed
at the thickness of its armor the power
of its gun but tactically it's used very
poorly by the Red Army what tends to
happen as some of this is too due to the
design and the crew ergonomics of it but
these guys who are driving these
vehicles have had very little experience
on the vehicle command control and the
leadership is frankly abysmal at the
time in the Red Army and so even though
there's some outstanding examples of
t-34s doing heroic actions holding up
enormous German forces statistically
really most of them about half of them
are breaking down before they even get
into action and that problem is as I
mentioned some of it as well as to do
with the design so for example when we
look at this vehicle the early model
t-34s with that turret that's a two-man
turret now I'm not that big a bloke but
I couldn't even fit my shoulders into
that turret across the rear there so how
two guys are supposed to be in there the
commander and also the gunner is
supposed to fit in that very tight space
you know that is a cramped area there
the other issue the commander doesn't
have a Coppola so his actual vision from
inside that vehicle he's got one
periscope and again the Germans report
on the fact that quite often they could
get three aimed accurate rounds off for
every one that the Soviets are firing
and only platoon commanders vehicles
have a radio
so these vehicles in a platoon are
signalling to each other either with
flags and as you can imagine under fire
the last thing you want to be doing is
opening up your hatch and starting to do
flag signals so again some of these
early accounts the Germans are reporting
on these tanks almost following each
other around not being very tactically
aware not using the very thick armor
that they've got comparatively at the
time and they're impressive firepower to
great effect now the early model L 11
gun the 76.2 mm
- gun a design viewer the gravy design
Bureau it in in Russia is ends up coming
up with a better design they call it the
f34 gun and they are not given official
permission to start producing this gun
but they go ahead anyway and it's only
because of the good reports on this
newer gun with its better penetration
that comes back from the frontline that
that starts being added to the 1941
model of the t-34 so again it's part of
this story that as the t-34 goes through
its development it goes through a number
of changes now that gun firing an
armor-piercing composite rigid round in
other words a slug of something like
tungsten within a wider 76.2 millimeter
sheath that round could go through
ninety millimeters of armor plate at
about five hundred meters and you have
to think in the summer of 41 if you're
looking at the panzer three and the
panzer 4 most of those tanks maximum
you've got about 60 millimeters of armor
so that's a very effective tank killing
gun early in the campaign we've
mentioned about reliability that diesel
engine in the rear why tracks tracks of
course the Russians know about Russian
winters and of course it's not that many
metaled road surface roads in Russia so
the idea of the wide tractors spread the
weight and that engine gives this
vehicle a power that can speed it up to
about 33 miles an hour so that's a good
turn of speed for about what turns out
to be a 28 short ton tank so it's a
still a fairly weighty tank there now
the German invasion in the summer of
1941 causes something that again almost
adds this magic to the t-34 story
they've got to move some of the
factories that are now making the t-34
out the way of the advancing German
military and they take them back behind
the Ural Mountains and that means not
only taking the machinery taking bits of
equipment that means taking the
engineers or people that are
manufacturing men and women are
should be drawn back to reestablish
their factories and keep this production
going and in that process one of the
things the Russians find is they say
look we're not going to do anything to
that vehicle unless even though they
know it's got weaknesses unless it
speeds production or it lessens cost
because we need those vehicles now the
Russians in 1941 can you believe this is
a figure they lose twenty thousand tanks
in that German advance they have a lot
of tanks that they need to build and
they need to build quickly so with that
movement of the factories start this
process of things on the t-34 that were
considered superfluous start getting
removed and you get to the point that
there's a certain point where some
factories are sending out these t-34
tanks without even a driver's seat in if
you want to see you fold up your
greatcoat and sit on it and so some of
those vehicles are different from
different factories because of what's
available to man at that time but
they're also the Russians are realizing
there's a lot of things that can go into
a tank that if it's just
is it really necessarily number one or
can we simplify it and the great story
of the t-34 is during its production it
ends up doubling the thickness of its
armor it doubles its penetration ability
of its firepower and it has the cost of
making one of these tanks so they start
with for about two hundred ninety
thousand rubles they get it down to
about one hundred and sixty thousand
roubles and they get to the point that
they're producing 1200 of these t-34s in
about 1942 a month I mean that's a
staggering figure to be able to coming
out with and that's that key in the
background what we've got to remember
with the t-34 is the numbers that can be
produced it has excellent elements to it
as a tank it has a bismal crew
ergonomics the poor driver in here is
visibility the amount of muscle power he
needs to change gear all these things
are not good about that vehicle but when
you can produce them in
many numbers that is bound to have an
effect on the battlefield now its
superiority in firepower and armor
protection starts waning fairly quick
quickly in 1942 the original German 37
millimeter anti-tank gun not that
effective on a t-34 there's this account
of one of the gun crews they fire about
25 rounds the only effective round from
that 37 millimeter manages to jam the
turret but then the Germans are starting
to get 5 centimeter towed anti-tank guns
and then seven point five centimeters
coming into service and of course from
1942 the Panzer 4 is then having that
long barreled high-velocity 75
millimeter gun fitted so all of a sudden
these t-34s are not as an impressive bit
of kit on the battlefield and again in
terms of losses many of these vehicles
we always think here tank museum tank on
tank warfare actually its anti-tank guns
are doing a huge amount of the damage
now for the t-34 so success though it is
it is also the tank that gets knocked
out the most in World War 2 44,000 t-34
losses in the combat now some of those
tanks are taken back to the factories
rebuilt reissued and that's another one
of the issues because as I've mentioned
already all the different factories are
building two slightly different build
standards slightly different design
parts and of course when we're adding up
numbers there's the other issue which is
these factories are also they're doing
new build but also taking in damaged
vehicles and they're added to the mix
and then they go out again so you'll see
it's almost hard to find two 234 tanks
with exactly the same design build
because there's so many little
alterations and changes and improvements
simple things as well like in that
trying to make it simpler get rid of the
rubber on the tires things like the F 34
gun starts off with over 800 component
parts they cut that down to 600
component parts so again that idea of
simplifying the process now by the
summer of 1943 it is ready
apparent to the Red Army that not only
with the Panzer 4 with the long barrel
gun but then certainly at the Battle of
curse starting to meet the Panther that
the t-34 is suffering so they start a
program for a replacement vehicle and
that's what we'll have a look at next
the realization that they're going to
have to build a new tank leads the
Russians to come up with a design that's
called the t43
now the problem with the t-thought 43
they've got some good ideas let's keep
about 70% of its construction from parts
that are already being built from the
t-34 the problem though is that when it
comes out it ends up being less mobile
than the t-34 and even though it's got a
new turret with a new 85 millimeter gun
on it it's not considered a success and
therefore they go back to the drawing
board and have another look at the t-34
and what that develops into is they
realize actually we can enlarge the
turret ring on the t-34 from originally
it's 56 inches they take it up to 63
inches and they take this new three-man
turret that's been designed for the t43
adapt it and put it on an enlarged t-34
hull and that becomes the t-34 / 85 the
85 millimeter gun equipped tank now that
process leads to the tanks going into
service in about February of 1944 and
when we look at the t-34 85 we're
actually looking at a very different
beast yes it's a t-34 evolved but at the
same time it's adding things for the
crew that makes this a much better tank
to be able to fight from for example the
commander now in the top has his own
Coppola and so he can look out all
around rather than that one original
periscope he was given the turret now
has a turret basket the original t-34
had no basket at all ammunition stored
on the floor under rubber mats you open
the box took out the ammunition pass it
up
now with this vehicle yes ammunition
still stored on the floor but it's now
got a turret basket which means the crew
can turn together within the vehicle as
well other changes that go on we've now
got a three-man turret so three men the
commander now doesn't just have to
command and man the gun he can just be
his what his real role is looking out
for targets commanding the whole vehicle
that's important we get a increase in
the ratio of radios not every tank gets
one but most of them now start getting
radios and that is fitted in the turret
in the t-34 85 the original fit in the
earlier t-34 turret was on the floor of
the vehicle so again access issues for
communications
now this enlarged turret three-man crew
that loader is now being added there as
well as the gunner so again
crew ergonomics better from the point of
view of the workability of the vehicle
much of the hull remains the same apart
from the addition of further thicker
armor so we're now up to about 90
millimeters of armor plate there because
the guns bigger the amount of ammunition
goes down early t-34s you get around 90
rounds of the 76 millimeter rare
ammunition in there now with this bigger
gun you're down to about 50 up to 55
rounds and there's normally about nine
ready rounds stored inside the turret
ready to be used the rest of them again
on those floor boxes down further below
now these vehicles go into production
they are also starting views tactically
if we go back to that earlier can't talk
about when we were looking at how the
Russians thought they were going to use
their military this early phase of the
war has been that war almost of
attrition they're using their space
they're using they're massing themselves
the second phase of the war and this
almost heralds it when it's coming in
from the beginning of 40 forwards
onwards you're now looking at that other
Soviet theory that they wanted to fight
with which is that war of annihilation
using their operational art that kind of
that that deep battle theory that
they've been looking at in the 1930s to
great effect with operations like
banquet Ron
and the advanced on Berlin stunningly
successful use of heavy artillery tanks
tank riders so on these vehicles you'll
notice on the side of them metal bars
are added so that again you've almost in
ended up with motorized infantry that
could be taken into action in the back
of these vehicles and the use of air
power of course those things coming to
back back together mean that the effect
that the Soviet Red Army has in 1944-45
is is gone leaps and bounds forward from
just trying to do their earlier war
tactics of delaying and trying to hold
up that massive German advance and as I
say vehicles like this are really key to
that
now the t-34 it's produced in massive
numbers as I mentioned earlier about
80,000 we think all told and its
continued introduction after the war
ends by the end of the war about 55
percent of the Soviet tank forces made
up of variants of the t-34 vehicle it
stopped production it actually goes back
into production in both Poland and
Czechoslovakia in the early 1950s and of
course there's so many of these vehicles
a bit like the American Sherman which is
got a lot of comparisons with it ends up
being either sold on gifted to Soviet
satellite countries used all around the
world the list of countries where the
t-34 is fought is enormous and those
battles it's involved on there's another
whole story the use of the t-34 after
world war ii still in service with some
armies right into the 21st century now
the issue about the t-34 overall as well
one of the other things when we look at
this tank is what we're looking at now
is less about whatever I say about facts
figures misinformation that's come out
over many decades because again from the
Soviet area some of this information was
big tup in a way about its success other
information didn't come out the archives
till much later on and it's still
appearing so trying to form a view of
this particular tank is very hard to
come up with an accurate one no doubt
I've been saying a number of mistakes
and what I've been talking to you about
in this talk but the issue really is
what this tanks
malaises this is the tank for the
Russian that symbolizes their victory in
world war two it is not the tank that
wins world war two for the Russians it's
actually the spirit and the stoicism of
the Russian people that does that but
because just like in Britain the
Spitfire becomes that iconic item this
is for the Russians one of those items
that is now moved beyond just the facts
and figures it becomes a symbol and an
icon of that victory and you can see
that recently because about 40 t-34 85
tanks have been gifted by the government
allows they've transported them back on
railway flats going all the way through
Russia people have been turning up at
stations to almost pay homage to these
vehicles as they go past and those
vehicles are going to be used again in
parades in celebration commemorations
into the future that's what this item
actually means to the Russian people if
you enjoyed that video please support
the Tank Museum by subscribing to their
YouTube channel and also support them on
patreon